i i know it's maybe sounds weird but the
idea of like a sociopath where it
becomes all about
mimicking the behaviors where you have
to put all this thought into like
okay i put my arm here this indicates
this behavior
like all those components into being
able to start
trying to develop friendships yeah
welcome hello um so yeah
can you first tell me what you you know
what you go by and
and how you'd like to be addressed today
um dust is fine
yes okay i'm all over dr k it's nice to
meet you desk
nice to meet you as well um thank you
very much for
you know coming on we appreciate it
absolutely um is there something
important so can you just tell us a
little bit about
uh you know i understand you're a
streamer so can you tell us a little bit
about
what kind of what kind of streaming you
do and where we can find you
uh so yes i i focus a lot on charity
um it's it's one of the things that i've
really found to just help with my own
mental health
and in fact one of the things that they
recommend is helping others tends to be
like that the best way to kind of just
deal with your own problems and kind of
you know get a lot of that um intrinsic
value
okay so i've been doing that a lot um
you can find me at
twitch.tv mephisto i mainly play a lot
of world of warcraft
uh things like speed running collecting
i really really enjoy collecting things
that that sense of completion is really
satisfying
cool thanks a lot and um is there
something in particular that you wanted
to talk about today des
um so really i just want to go ahead and
get across
what autism is i want to kind of engage
with the the community and
help create some understanding of
um that that concept especially like
when
i didn't get diagnosed until i was 29
and what i thought autism
was growing up as a kid isn't
what it turned out to be and then there
there's the whole issue of things like
aba and there's there's this big charity
event going on right now
that is uh color the spectrum which i
think is sending out a lot of
mixed messages about what autism is
and is more so hurtful to autistics
rather than helpful
interesting so um a lot of
so okay so that that sounds
uh like a great structure des do you
mind if i ask you
um just throughout this conversation i
think a lot of times the way that we try
to illustrate things
is by asking people sort of like
personal questions about their
experience
of a particular thing whether it be like
you know
dealing with um you know toxicity and
gaming
or you know dealing with depression
things like that is it okay if i ask you
um you know personal questions about
what your
experience of autism is things like that
yes that's completely fine in fact i
um recently there was a video that just
went viral of a bpd per individual
who um was hitting themselves in the
head repeatedly after being
harassed by a customer and that video
gave me the strength to actually post a
video of me having an autistic meltdown
on stream
um so i'm i'm very very open
to to answer anything personal or to do
that because i see this as a way of
helping others
yeah and and just you know for
clarification if i ever ask you anything
that
um you don't feel is appropriate or you
don't feel comfortable answering
you know please just signal that to me
in some way if i
detect from you that maybe we're talking
about things that could be making you
uncomfortable i may point it out to you
um and you know at the end of the day
like we're really here to
help people but i don't want you to hurt
yourself or sacrifice anything
for the sake of the greater good okay
if i do so it's it's of my own volition
i understand to make a difference
pain is kind of necessary at times but
it's important to recognize that i
choose that not that it's it's something
i'm unwilling of
yeah that's a that's a pretty profound
statement that pain is necessary
sometimes to make a difference
can you help me understand that
um being like like being open about
autism
like using my life as a kind of open
book to help others
one of the things that i've enjoyed most
about streaming is having
um individuals who didn't realize they
themselves were autistic
and after saying and hearing my story
and everything that i talked about make
that connection they go and see a
therapist
they go through the practice and then
they get diagnosed themselves
right it's it puts you in these
positions where
you know i really wish i didn't have to
open up about this but
it really also at the same time helps a
lot of people
what makes you not want to open up about
it
um it's it's it's
there is a lot of negativity that can
come from these things i mean
for example the the sharing the the
video of
myself having an autistic meltdown where
i i repeatedly punched myself in the
head
it's it's scary right it's a scary thing
to witness
it's something that could potentially
make future
job opportunities impossible
and i understand though that
these things have value and that they
can help others
and like it it's the hard thing where
i know i can handle it i know that if
things
go bad i can at least
i'm sure i can find a way to recover
from it whereas
go ahead i was just going to say so
you've mentioned
autistic breakdown or meltdown a couple
of times now and
and apparently you were um you know
hitting yourself
can you help us understand what you mean
by that term
so an autistic meltdown is
i would say in some ways it's similar to
like the the common understanding of a
meltdown
in a neurotypical individual where
everything is at its absolute worst
um in that you can't really process
anything going on
um at least to my understanding and for
myself
basically it's like everything ceases to
function the brain goes straight
into the fight or flight system but it
doesn't have a way to channel it
so everything just kind of
blows up and as a result
i i can't think i can't function one of
the
the negative stems that i have to tends
to just be
punching myself in the head because i'm
so overwhelmed
um it's taken a lot of practice and a
lot of awareness
to to be able to recognize the only way
that i can stop these things is to be
aware that i've reached the point
of that i'm going to be overwhelmed
sooner
rather than when it already happens so
it requires a great deal
of self-awareness to avoid these
situations
and can you share at all like what your
experience of being in in a meltdown is
like
it's
it's it's like
it's it's almost like i guess a panic
attack well maybe not a panic attack but
it's it's a blur right so like i i don't
really have any cognitive processing
over what's going on i don't really
understand what's happening
um it it just
it it is yeah and
yeah it's it's really hard to like
know what's going on in those moments um
i try to basically it's
it's i don't want to say it's quite like
drowning but i do feel like there's
these little moments where i can get
that little breath of air
to try and move myself away from it
so of course sorry no go for it
um and of course like like the the
better i get at it
the more i can kind of shut those
feelings down which
would result in a shutdown which is kind
of like
it's it's like a momentary to pre well i
wouldn't call it momentary but
it's it's like this this depression or
this this weighted blanket
this sinking feeling where everything
just becomes super muted
um usually if i into that i'm
i'm out for like two three four hours
i'll just end up passing out
yeah so uh you know it's interesting
because what i'm hearing from you is
that
you know it takes a lot of awareness to
manage you know
preventing a meltdown but that when
you're actually in the meltdown you sort
of lose yourself
yes um and and you know sometimes on
on stream we'll kind of joke a little
bit about becoming an
anger elemental where like your
your personhood becomes like
dominated by a particular emotion and
then like some
people will be like anger personified or
shame
personified and you sort of become like
a shame elemental
and when i'm sort of hearing from you
just like i'm trying to put myself kind
of in your shoes it's that like
you are no longer there and you're just
dominated or overwhelmed you don't have
particular
cognitions or thought processes it
sounds like there's a lot of emotion
that you're experiencing
that's quite negative and you're not
really in control of your behaviors
necessarily either and that you kind of
like well
it almost reminds me a little bit of of
what i think about kind of
physiologically as like like a seizure
actually so you get this high
state of hyper excitation
of electrical signal followed by this
refractory period where everything kind
of shuts down
and yeah and it and it's really yeah you
wanted to say something sorry
oh no no yeah that's that's very yes
um and so can you tell us des a little
bit about like you said you were
diagnosed at the age of 29
and and you know what growing up was
like what you understood autism to be
um did you recognize in some way that
you may not have been neurotypical or
how did you understand that
sure um so in retrospect
like looking back years later especially
after my diagnosis
my my uncle um is
mentally challenged and also likely
undiagnosed with autism
um i had kind of
put myself through through
my own version of aba as a kid growing
up because
i saw the way he was treated um
my he was yelled at he was kind of
shamed he was dismissed he
would have love withheld from him based
on his behaviors so
every time i saw him walking back and
forth i did everything i could
to um to
avoid displaying those behaviors if you
know the the sound
of a spoon on a ceramic bowl was painful
to my ears
i would just grin and bear it because i
didn't want to display
his behavioral characteristics and be
treated the
the same way um
and go ahead yeah
sorry i i keep interrupting you um it's
okay
so i'm just so curious what were the
behaviors that you noticed in your uncle
that you didn't want to duplicate so so
the the rocking back and forth
the specific um uh reaction that sounds
the way that he interpreted or
interacted with
problems um and of course that that even
then extended
into um excitement so like things like
christmas i
began to immediately mute that behavior
as well
so instead of being excited about
christmas i was like oh it's just
christmas and i did this at a very young
age
because i i didn't want any of those
associated behaviors
which is i i think what resulted in just
a lot of
knowing and unknowing masking growing up
as a kid i was
originally diagnosed with adhd in third
grade
and then i i always knew something was
wrong
i just didn't understand what was wrong
um the best way i could describe it is i
always kind of felt like
everyone knew something i didn't know
like i i don't know how to like like
fully explain that but i always felt
like
i always just knew something was wrong
and it wasn't until
like i i graduated um college that i
started to experience
um what is known as autistic burnout
where
i lost a lot of my masking and abilities
to kind of do things things like driving
became hotter
um my um i that's when i ended up
getting diagnosed with
ocd pure o because i was having a lot of
intrusive thoughts very obsessive
um my anxiety started shooting through
the roof
um basically all the the kind of coping
mechanisms that i had learned how to
deal with throughout life they
all came crashing down which ended up
leading to the autism diagnosis
and then you mentioned that um you know
you started like muting or masking
particular behaviors
it sounds like that's a pretty like
subconscious process
is that fair to say uh it was both
conscious and subconscious
um i mean i i would probably
uh equate it to um
like instead of being the person to to
touch a hot stove to be like oh that's
hot i used
others to learn that so if i saw someone
else treat it a certain way
i was like okay i'm not going to be act
that way because i don't want to be
treated that way
um honestly i'd say that was kind of
like a lot of how i learned things was i
had to study other people to understand
those behaviors
yeah um so let me
do you mind explaining what aba is
because some people aren't familiar with
that
um so aba is a
psychological practice it's a therapy
where behaviors that are considered
undesirable are replaced with behaviors
that
are considered desirable it is i
wouldn't say basically like dog training
but very similar
um that that idea of like say
if you wanted to get a person to make
eye contact
you you they used to be that you would
punish them if they didn't make eye
contact now that they
they prefer kind of just uh reward
reinforcement
although at the same time there's a lot
of question well not a lot of questions
it's mostly an unethical practice
what um okay so let's let's take sort of
like
i'm gonna table some of the stuff about
aba
color the spectrum things like that i
think um des
it's very helpful i personally am
learning a lot talking to you and i'd
love to just hear more of your
raw experience because i i think you
know rather than using like terms and
stuff which we can definitely get to i
think that the
is like you said a lot of people with
autism feel like
you know everyone else is watching a
movie with the volume on
and like you can tell like you're still
watching the movie so you kind of know
what's going on like you can kind of
enjoy what's going on but it seems like
there's something that other people are
sort of getting that you don't seem to
have access to
i think that's that is such a good and
in some ways it's also devastating to
kind of hear people talk like that
but when i when i work with people with
autism like i think that's such a
beautiful way to describe their
experience
it's sort of like you know some people
just seem to know things that i don't
know i don't know exactly what i'm
missing because you can try to be like
calculating about it right like you can
kind of say like okay well
it's clearly not like you know i can
hear things and they can hear things
it's just
things seem to affect me differently or
other people
things seem easier for other people and
i don't know
why this has to be so hard for me
um those are kinds of the sentiments
that i've kind of come away with what do
you think
yes i absolutely agree with that uh
like just everything growing up like
making friends
interacting in school the interactions
teachers
like all these individual components
every single aspect felt like a struggle
because i
couldn't i couldn't connect i i
struggled to start making friends until
i was
21 22 and the way i went about it
was i sat down with a therapist and i
told my plan that i was gonna go to bars
i was going to sit there and i was just
going to
observe like i wouldn't have a phone or
anything i would just sit there and
watch everyone
to the point that i would become so
bored that the
the act of talking with someone would
kind of at least
compensate for the fear of interaction
to some degree as well
but also in that time i'd be watching
you know
how the body language displayed what
topics were they discussing
you know how how did they interact you
know like all these little components i
observed all that to try and
replicate um like i know it
maybe sounds weird but the idea of like
a sociopath where it becomes all about
mimicking the behaviors where you have
to put all this thought into like
okay i put my arm here this indicates
this behavior
like all those components into being
able to start trying to develop
friendships
yeah it sounds quite labor-intensive
and is it okay if i ask you one or two
more questions about your uncle
yes i i don't want to go too too
personal on my uncle since he's
not me and sure totally understand so so
this
um uh i'll also you know let me know i'm
i'm
asking for permission for a reason so
let me know if we skirt that boundary
but
what i'd like to understand is like you
know are there particular experiences
that
see so it sounds to me like you noticed
that your uncle behaved in certain ways
that maybe you shared certain tendencies
with him and then you started to mask or
mute those behaviors
did i understand that correctly yes and
i was wondering if you could just
illustrate for us like an experience
that you had where you saw something
and then you recognized like oh i
shouldn't actually act like that
um the one that oddly like the one that
stands on
my mind the most which is silly um
was literally how he held a fork uh
my my grandma yelled at him something
fierce
like like just just chewed him out of
like we were having dinner
and just the way that he held a fork um
because like he would hold the fork like
with his fist rather than like that
and that that just it's forever burned
in my memory
um i remember things like kim
complaining about the noises sound and
everyone just
doubling down on that sound so that like
they all started doing it
like like those little components and
seeing how how they were
how he was kind of treated was
like i i don't remember everything since
it was this this is
like i but those those are like two of
the things that are really just
burned into my memory yeah i i think
that's that was
exactly sort of what i was looking for
when i asked the question because i
think
a lot of times i'm trying to imagine
that i'm like a 15 year old autistic kid
right now or a kid with autism depending
on you know what
what's the appropriate way to describe
it um
and i think the challenge is that like
you know when we use technical terms
like
it doesn't actually capture people's
experience
and and i think the way that you're kind
of describing that like there are these
particular things which seem like a
little bit
you know unique or idiosyncratic but
then a lot of people like really
you know punish people for being a
little bit different
um or they don't it's just so foreign to
understand
that like um or have you ever heard of
misophonia
no so it's interesting so there's some
correlation potentially between i i
don't know if there's some
correlation but misophony is actually
like a
a neurological illness or disorder
where benign sounds cause people like
excruciating pain
and what i'm hearing from you is that
that there are particular sounds which
feel
very like almost painful to you and it
reminds me of
actually misophonia but um yeah so thank
you for sharing that because i think
that really illustrates it
and and what did you notice about
yourself that was different
one of the major things well it's one of
those things like looking back on it now
that you noticed that it was different
but like for example always wearing a
beanie i've always been wearing shorts
um i think i got diagnosed with sensory
processing processing disorder fairly
early on
um i i vaguely remember going to therapy
for it
uh but it's it's more of these things
where you look
back and you start to realize when
you're growing up as a kid you don't
necessarily
necessarily think you know oh this is
wrong it's
why is this so hard why why is it so
easy for everyone else
why can't i accomplish what they're
accomplishing
it's hard to realize like i i didn't
grow up in the the
best of households and for me while
growing up through that i thought that
was normal
it wasn't until you know even when like
visiting other places where it was much
nicer and everything
i like that was the abnormality to me it
wasn't until i grew up
and you know met my wife and i started
to realize like
oh that's this this isn't normal
and so it's it's kind of that that uh
you don't really notice it when you're
in there um
i kind of forgot the question though
that's totally cool i
i i loved your answer um so let me just
ask
a different one what what uh what was
growing up like for you
it was hard um
it was it was hard uh
friendships were really difficult the
friendships that i
did make often resulted in harm to
myself
so um people who i hung out with
would end up abusing me
um like i i would i'd been hidden in the
head with a shovel
a razor scooter punched in the head
repeatedly
um i i even
i haven't had one instance and this this
isn't a pc gamer article so it's it's
um but i was even pissed on at one point
um
and these were people that i considered
friends because you know they they
interacted with me and
that was that was rough
um i actually caught a bit of asthma
gold's interview and i could even relate
to some of what he was talking about
well he specifically referenced it as
laziness i.e if a light bulb goes off in
a room
he he was oh i just won't use that room
anymore
um that's kind of the household that i
grew up in
so like if our our sink stopped working
we we just used the bathroom sink
instead so there was a point of time
where there was like five
or seven years where um our
our kitchen sink just wasn't used
yeah it's it it was rough
how does it feel to talk about things
like that yes
honestly it feels it feels like past
trauma
right where like i i went through this
i've talked with
with normal like not normal
numerous therapists about my experiences
growing up as a kid that kind of like
trauma and stuff and it
it is what it is it happened
it sucks but focus on the now
yeah yeah i can sort of i can sort of
detect your
um the imprint
of therapy and all the work that you've
done in the way that you talk about it
you know i i think that there's i'm
hearing a lot of acceptance
i'm not hearing a whole lot of excuses
or defensiveness
um which is which is interesting because
a lot of times you know when people will
talk about
their upbringing and like or the
negative things that potentially their
parents or loved ones used to do there
will be a lot of like caveats excuses
you know balancing the equation oh my
parents
did love me a lot things like that you
know and and i'm not really hearing a
whole lot of that from you which doesn't
you know i'm not getting the sense that
your parents were um abusive or
neglectful i mean maybe they were but
like
you know i'm not i'm not i think it's it
sounds like there were just a lot of
challenges in the household you know
it sounds like some of your caregivers
could have done a better job
it's definitely one of those tough
things my mom she
single mom all that my my father
uh who i actually finally got to meet
for the first time when i turned 30
which was interesting
um he was he was in prison and stuff so
it's
you know it is what it is it's best to
focus on the now
because like you can't do anything to
fix the pass you can do plenty to fix
the present
yeah what i'm hearing is that you kind
of spawned in a rough location
that that puts it well yeah actually
[Laughter]
didn't really get a winning spawn there
but
but you got to play from it right like
wherever you spawned you got to you know
you got to work with it absolutely and i
i feel i am plus i mean i feel like
where
where i spawned uh resulted in
me doing a lot of good yeah i mean hell
we've we've raised over
50 000 for charity since i've started
streaming which is just
wow that's amazing man like i never
thought someone
someone like me would be able to do so
much good
and who is someone like you
disabled like struggling like i've
always struggled to
do full-time employment that kind of
thing but i've always just
you know i never felt like i could
connect or fit in or do anything
and to suddenly be able to be like oh no
actually you found a place where things
are working
and you're actually doing a really good
job at it it
it really changes it's one of the things
i love about twitch
right where in a lot of instances where
you struggle in the world real world
especially as a disabled individual
to finally find a platform where your
disability isn't as much of a limiter as
it is in reality
i mean streaming is reality but you like
the
the real world so to speak yeah i think
there's a lot of interesting
philosophical
points there about you know what's the
real world what isn't
i'm curious um how do you feel about the
term disabled
uh i'm i'm personally fine with it i
i i understand that there's some some
backlash around the
the word and everything but i mean
it's hard not to refer to it as a
disability because i feel like it limits
me in so many ways going for my master's
program
that was a nightmare and
academia in general for for those of us
with with disabilities is almost an
impossibility
and then adding in covet into it and i
was completely wrecked i
i couldn't even i i finished my master's
program with the 4.0 but i couldn't
finish writing my thesis
because everything changed and i just
it was like there it just slipped
through my hands
interesting what what's made it hard can
you help us understand like you said
you've struggled to maintain full-time
employment what's made that hard
um a lot of it
is focusing
and maintaining a lot of the
interactions the
the social interactions everything that
goes in at work understanding like the
the the hierarchy and the systems that
are there and the clerks and the groups
in office politics that's what they're
called like like
navigating through all that was it
basically felt impossible um
there are certain tasks that you're
expected to be able to complete like
talking on a phone um i've learned
ways around it but it's difficult still
i really really really really hate
phones i do not like phones they are
such a just overwhelming sensory
especially phones ringing
and then of course you know like like
sometimes because a lot of workplaces
they don't give you
you space you're all kind of in like uh
enclosed so
things like um like i used to have
a a co-worker who would like
spam click their mouse to activate their
computer they're just like
click click click click click i could
not get any work done
i would have i would have noise
cancelling headphones and everything
or you know people come up behind you
start having full count conversations
there are so many components in
a workplace that you know neurotypicals
or just
normal individuals would be like oh
whatever like oh i can just cancel that
i
i can't um and
there there's also like when when i
reach these points of where i'm
completely overwhelmed like
hey if i keep pushing myself i'm going
to have a meltdown
work tends to not be a place where you
can go ahead and get the flexibility
necessary for that um and that that's
again one of the things that i love
about streaming
is it's like hey i've reached i'm like
nearing that point where i'm overwhelmed
i'm going to have a meltdown
and i can just stop like it's
sorry go ahead and i don't know i was
gonna say have you played darkest
dungeon
i have not i've always wanted to but i
i've never actually started
it it's interesting because here i've
never used a darkest dungeon analogy on
stream before but hearing kind of like
your workplace environment like i don't
know if you
are familiar with the mechanics but you
know you have an hp pool like any other
rpg
and then like essentially magic does
stress damage
and so this is like a reverse hp pool
where like it goes from zero to 200 and
if you hit 200 you die
and then like once you hit 100 like your
character gets like a pretty significant
debuff
what i'm almost hearing from you is that
there's like this stress like it's just
like darkest dungeon where
there's stuff that like racks up your
stress and then if it hits a certain
point
like you have a meltdown and you can
even
kind of use a lot of your like cognitive
energy or mana pool
to like suppress or like
kind of keep that stuff buried but it's
still like building up in the background
and if you force yourself into these
situations
you can kind of last for some amount of
time but i
it sounds like you know that meltdown or
burnout as you mentioned
you mentioned something about like
coping mechanism burn out
um i i forget what the term you used but
you said that you had like
the all of your autistic burnout yeah
um and and so it's it's bizarre but
that's kind of what i'm hearing is that
kind of fair
that like you could manage it for a
while but it really wouldn't get better
and then you
sort of it was too much for you to
handle yes
i think that's a good comparison um
specifically like it it's
we can kind of push ourselves and this
is one of the things that i had to learn
in my my master's program is how often i
had to say no
because if we push ourselves like i
i don't like hitting myself in the head
like it's it's
one it's it's not a pretty thing to see
and two
it's not very good for myself and so
i i had to start learning to say no more
often
even though like i wanted right like i
wanted to play everything i wanted to
get my master's degree i wanted to to
succeed in academia
i i understood that i
i had to just stop otherwise like it
would just get worse
and worse and these these meltdowns like
the the more i have them the more i push
myself
the the worse that it would get yeah
des what's it like to want something so
much and not be able to
do it
it sucks um i think we can all kind of
relate to that
um but i think it's also something that
we all have to come to terms with
that the the notion that we can become
anything
isn't a reality and that sometimes it's
best to pay attention to what we can do
and to strengthen that rather than
climb an impossible wall and i know that
i
i can you know get my masters i can get
my doctorates but it's going to be about
finding
um finding a program and
thing that works with me
desk bro i think how did you learn that
because i think like 99 of people out
there like
arguably myself included you know
have trouble learning the lesson of like
i want this so much but i may not be
able to get it
how do you believe me acceptance believe
me once you punch yourself
in the head enough times you learn
[Laughter]
um seriously though like like when when
you
reach those points where you you feel
yourself breaking you realize
something's going to to give right
and i i think that's kind of one of the
at least the the positive things
is um learning that
it was like i can't keep doing this i
got to find another way
the best way to describe my experiences
is
it's like trying to kool-aid man through
a bunch of walls and eventually you
can't kool-aid through the wall so you
have to find a way around it
yeah and yeah beautifully sad
yes you know it's it's also kind of
interesting
let me just think about this because you
mentioned the cycle which i think is
really important to understand
um which is like you know once you
kool-aid man through a wall or
or you know once you fail it's something
that you really want
it actually causes you to try to
kool-aid your way through more walls
right you dig deeper there's some amount
of
shame there's some amount of lack of
acceptance there's some amount of
attachment and wanting it
that you kind of like you like burn out
even more
like you try even harder you dig deeper
you push yourself more
because that's what we're sort of taught
to do right like don't ever give up
and where there's a will there's a way
and then so then what happens is
and the the crazy thing is that you can
kool-aid your way through a wall right
you can smash through things
by digging deep and then what happens is
people like
they dig deep and then they like they do
it they sort of succeed
even though they're like cannibalizing
themselves from the inside
and then they say okay this works right
because then they've been able to do it
and then they got what they wanted and
they're sort of not really paying
attention to the cost and then they
think to
themselves oh i can do this this is
possible
and that's almost what i find to be like
the most damning thing because it's sort
of like yeah it's possible but
what did you have to pay you know what's
the price that you pay
to get to where you are and then if they
fail again the whole cycle repeats and
they're like oh
if i had dug deeper if i had sacrificed
more if i had done more
if i wasn't just so messed up like if if
all of these things and then like the
cycle repeats and it repeats and repeats
and what i'm curious about is you know
when
when you are able to push yourself and
actually accomplish things
and then like when you fail and you sort
of like how did you get get out of that
cycle you know like because i i can sort
of see it going both ways one which is
like
you need to do better if you did better
you could do it
versus recognizing oh actually like
maybe i can't do that
yeah it's it's it's really hard to say
honestly the best way like the
the past ever since the diagnosis which
is it's been almost
four years now i feel especially like
every well
honestly the past five years have been a
blur like ever since i graduated college
everything's just kind of
it's it's i don't know like the the
the ability to grasp like what's
happened
feels less tangible than it did when i
was younger
but what i do know is each time i reach
the breaking point each time i hit a
wall
um it got harder and harder to kind of
break through and to keep going
and i i know that
eventually i was it was hurting myself
to to just
bash into the wall and so i
had to i had to start thinking about it
more critically i had to look at the
wall
and you know sometimes there there
actually happens to be a door right next
to the wall
sometimes i sometimes i have to
to you know maybe get scaling gear or
you know whatever their various option
because i
was literally like i was literally
killing myself so to speak by constantly
running into these walls
i think one of the the things that makes
it more apparent for those of us with
disabilities
is that we run into them more frequently
which
the more frequently that you run into it
you're going to be more aware
yeah whereas if it happens like you know
every six months every year
you might fall into that same trap where
you you i just gotta dig deeper i just
gotta dig deeper
so i really think that contributed a lot
is that it's that
when you have these problems you run
into them more frequently and
you learn faster so to speak yeah that's
it's so wise and also a little bit
damning because
kind of what i'm hearing for your answer
is like you know oh des like how did you
guys
you know figure out how to wipe rag i
mean
how to down ragnaros and it's like yeah
i wiped a whole lot
like other people may wipe every six
months to a year but i wiped like
once a week and and it's really hard to
say but
to listen to and to really think about
but i i do think that there's a lot of
value to sort of like
recognizing that maybe you're just like
more experienced at wiping
and and i don't know what that means for
people who are neurotypical who
encounter things
less frequently but i'm certainly
detecting a lot of like
you know awareness on your part and and
critical thinking and sort of
recognizing who you are accepting
yourself for who you are
um separating out maybe what you should
be
from what you are
and i think in in some ways it sounds
like you started that process very young
because you noticed when you were young
that like you were different from other
people
absolutely um what have been
how did you feel about getting an autism
diagnosis or what was that like for you
to get diagnosed with autism it was a
major relief to be honest
um it was it was a struggle
uh the the therapist and kind of
everything
they don't like diagnosing adults i was
autistic
um they they don't really see or at
least my therapist didn't really see
that the resources were
useful to diagnosing an autistic adult
um that you were seen as like taking
resources away from autistic children
that that's something that could be you
know benefiting someone that they could
help
because once you're an adult there's
there's no support network there's
nothing that can really be
done um which is part of what led me
into charity because that's that's
literally horrifying to realize
okay you invest so heavily in autistic
children
and then it's just like well it's
someone else's problem now
right it's like building a beautiful
garden
and it's like ah we'll let the weeds
take over right like it just it makes no
sense
so getting that diagnosis not only gave
me
ease of mind and understanding of who i
was
but it also connected me with the
autistic community being able to connect
with other autistics that have had
similar experiences
to be able to to be a part of a network
where i finally
felt a sense of belonging which like i
i think a lot of that that um
that psychological usefulness is missed
in these diagnosis because they're
there's it's super important
it's really important to be able to have
that connection to have that belonging
to know that you're not alone to go from
feeling like
there there's no one else like you no
one else going through the problems that
you're going through
to someone like holy [ __ ] there's
there's other people out there that
that understand yeah
sounds like you had felt alone for a
long time and now
i'm sort of hearing you say a lot about
being able to connect to other people
but
i other people i've worked with have
also sort of emphasized that
they had a reason for why
things were that the way they were right
because people like
my experience with people with autism
just listening to them is they just feel
so broken like arbitrarily because it's
not there isn't like a diagnosis or
reason or rhyme
like you're just you're just bad at
making friends
there's like something fundamentally
busted
and you just suck at it there's no like
explanation there's no reason there's no
like
you know and and and for some people who
get an autism diagnosis they sort of
understand that
what i have always experienced which is
that it's hard for me to live life like
neurotypical people do
actually has like a neurological or
neuroscientific correlation to it
there are parts of my brain that
literally function
in a different way from like what a
neurotypical person's brain functions
like
and so it's not like some kind of moral
deficiency
or being weak or just sucking or like
a charisma stat that's like low
it's that you're wired differently
did that sort of have an impact for you
in that way or was it mostly about
connection
uh no definitely like finally having
that answer and understanding
um absolutely like i focus on the
connection because i i think that's a
really
important thing because i i think many
of us with autism
we desperately want social connection
that was like one of the
big misunderstandings that i had about
autism before getting my diagnosis
was that if if
you wanted to have friends if you wanted
that social interaction that you
couldn't be autistic
because autistics weren't weren't
sociable
which it's simply not the case and there
was there was like a lot of these kind
of
um this misinformation out there
that i had to search through to better
understand
what autism was when i went to seek my
my diagnosis
and and can you help us understand a
little bit about the sort of this
i can imagine it's tricky because on the
one hand it can be hard to make social
connections
and wanting social connections and what
it's like kind of swimming through those
waters
a lot of it like one of the big things
that i struggled with growing up as a
kid
is noticing when i was being annoying
right
like i would talk about something i'm
very passionate about something that i
care about
and realizing that the other person was
annoyed bored or
whatever in trying to like now
now like i have all this anxiety and i'm
like i'm constantly watching like facial
interactions i'm watching body language
like there's this huge anxiety where i'm
like okay i need to change the subject
to the point that even
even if someone is enjoying the
conversation
i'm ready to jump that like that
conversation like wait i've been talking
about this for three four or five
minutes okay i need to change subject
even if they are liking it because it's
it's almost like the script that plays
in my head
um yeah like like a lot of those that
kind of like
trying to figure it out was just it was
constant like okay i didn't get the
reaction i wanted or
okay this didn't happen the way it was
try again let's change one thing i mean
i i definitely relied on science on like
things like scientific method
to to be able to go and experiment and
like okay we'll try this one little
tweak we'll try this week we'll try this
tweak until i ended up with a script
that was somewhat successful
yeah it sounds very intensive
from an energy standpoint yes it's
it can be exhausting yeah and and that
you know once you came up with your
algorithm that like even if
the conversation organically didn't
require a shift
there's a part of your brain that has
learned that after four minutes about
talking about a subject the safest thing
to do is to switch the subject
yes yeah and but really
and i i know you use the term
sociopathic but i i think um
you know i think that somewhat apples
and oranges but
i am hearing a lot that you make like a
lot of your
social interactions are calculated and
and not out of a desire to like take
advantage of anyone but just because i
i think what i'm also hearing from you
and this is my experience working with
people with autism is that
you know some of the empathic circuitry
that allows people to like
naturally like know how to swim is
is not quite intact and so you have to
rely you have to figure out other ways i
i just had another analogy which maybe
is devastating and offensive
but sort of like a duck without feathers
you're still a duck but like some of the
things that you
normally allow you to float like you
have to learn how to like swim
in a different way
and and so it sounds it sounds really
tough man
yeah you mentioned specifically about
not trying to take advantage of others i
growing up before i knew i was autistic
that was one of the big things that i
dealt with a lot
was um like because of how i approached
everything and thinking about it to try
and elicit specific responses
i i like i had this this big fear
that i was deliberately trying to take
advantage of people
right because it was literally how i had
to solve all of my problems like i had
to do this like this
this component that came so natural to
everyone else
i had to go all this deliberate and like
thinking about each of these components
where i literally felt like i was
manipulating others
and it it sucked it definitely had a
huge kind of
negative mental toll i can completely
understand that i think
unfortunately um you know that's not
necessarily the case and i've i've met
um a ton of people who
are very emotionally like not overly
cognitive
and at the same time are also incredibly
manipulative
like it's not that thinking very
cognitively about social
interactions makes you manipulative or
not i've seen you know both versions of
that
and and des i'm curious you mentioned
that you're you're married
yes can you tell us a little bit about
how that happened because i know that's
something that's very anxiety provoking
for
a lot of people with autism like
romantic relationships
so i actually it's it's kind of silly i
kind of fell into my lap so to speak
um i i didn't
really have any relationship experience
until
i was 22
when i was 22 i um
i i this this sounds really bad
uh i basically found a situation where i
could rely on my looks
to be able to bypass romantic or
the the kind of romantic interactions to
lose my virginity
um so i had to go through this this kind
of like cold calculation to be able to
find myself in a position to be able to
to go through that because i wanted to
to solve that problem i'm sorry i'm
looking at chat
yes you can't look at chad from
sorry everyone wants to know how you did
it
i want to know but you can't look at
chat you're on a roll
when you're socially awkward and you're
not even if you're not neurotypical
imagine all the neurotypical people with
social anxiety who think that they're in
cells and aren't even on the spectrum
and here you have the answer for them
and you get distracted by chat
just let's put it on the adhd part as
well
um but yeah it is
um so that that whole situation i
i basically it kind of allowed me to
i don't know i've admit my way through
it so
like like relationships are really like
fine tasks where you need like
you know like you need to be able to
like
be able to move everything just right
for it to go through
and i specifically reference oven mitt
because that's what it feels like
interacting with social circumstances
it's this very
um texturous fine-tuned interaction and
we have oven mitts
so it feels really hard to to be able to
piece through that
and it it worked i
like looking back on it i feel bad
because it definitely feels like a
situation where
i may have manipulated someone
um into a romantic relationship in order
to
um meet that right it's it's not
a it's not a nice thing
at least i don't consider it a nice
thing um
but it allowed me to kind of get past
that that
big fear when you're a virgin which is
what happens when you do get to that
point right it completely
changed the kind of dialogue and
interaction for me
uh can you help me understand i i i
i find myself being curious about you
know what
yeah i just have so many questions like
can you just share more about that
i'm serious because i like i i think you
know
doing something because you want to get
laid like i can sort of understand where
you're coming from there but i think
just as equally as important is like
illustrating or helping people
understand what felt unethical about
for you about that what felt
manipulative for you how you came to
that realization
i feel like there's actually a lot of
all the memes and stuff aside
i think there's there's a lot of
important wisdom here
so mainly what made it feel manipulative
is for the individual like i i didn't
really care specifically about them that
it was
kind of a means to an end
i mean they they were obviously
interested and wanted to engage in
everything so it was
mutual but for me my
understanding of sexual interaction has
always been based around things like
love right that that very romantic
nature
so utilizing it to
not utilizing love but utilizing sex to
kind of
understand was
ethically problematic to me i think um
interesting because you know to play
devil's advocate for a second i mean you
were the one who was there so i
but i'm sort of you know my
understanding
of of sex and love is that the two don't
necessarily have to go hand in hand
and that especially if you're a 22 year
old you know like
a little bit of figuring it out as long
as and it sounds like the other person
was like interested in consenting and
all
you know that's that's the really
important stuff to me but you know i
i i want to say that like i don't want
to discourage people from
figuring it out because at 22 you're not
going to know exactly what the
relationship is between sex and love
right right you're just not and and so i
i'm not hearing anything
so far that seems kind of unethical to
me
except maybe some expectations that you
had but or that you you maybe were not
that much like
potentially romantically into this
person but
um i i feel like i utilized them not for
sex
but for what sex meant which is why i
think this became
a little bit more unethical to me
oh no it's one of those things where
when you're 22
um it makes
sense but like looking back on it i i
basically
treated it kind of like a science
experiment
rather than like the the kind of like
sexual experience
right it was about seeing what it was
about getting through that and kind of
removing it as
a factor rather than
um
rather than just trying to get laid
interesting okay
and how did you meet your you said that
your current relationship sort of fell
into your lap
so i i met um i met my wife
through a friend that i was able to make
thanks to you know sitting in bars
constantly watching language
uh turns out they were like a big metal
head so we we
oh god it was amazing like finally this
was one of those scripts where i didn't
have to change the conversation every
four minutes
we would talk about metal for like hours
and hours and hours like uh we love
metal um but
eventually he told me about this this
girl that he had met she was getting her
bachelor's in neuroscience
i wanted to get my bachelor's in
neuroscience
and so we we um we started talking on
facebook
all that she was currently seeing
someone else
and you know as we talked more and more
i
um i i basically just laid out my
feelings for her and talked like you
know about how
like i i cared for her and all that um
and things just ended up working out she
ended up breaking up with the
the other guy who happened to be super
abusive um
we we shared our first kiss august 11th
um and it is
i don't know like i think because i
spent so much time
analyzing every single situation having
to be super aware
of where i was cognitively where i was
emotionally
actually ended up preparing me for that
relationship
so when we ended up in this i was very
quick to
i was very quick to be like hey this is
problematic or
hey this is bothering me or hey i don't
like this
and we would actually talk about things
before they became a problem
um i i definitely do see like a lot of
my experiences as an autistic having
been beneficial even unknowingly
because of how much i had to rely on
observing literally every single detail
yeah it sounds like you know i'm i'm
purposely avoiding chat
because i can only imagine you know all
the messages about
your autism and chadness rolled into one
but i i think it's great because i think
it sort of illustrates something really
really important which is that
um what i'm really hearing from you is
that you took a lot of risks right so i
i'm
not when you sort of confessed your
feelings for her had y'all met in person
um we we had men in person um we had met
a couple of times
uh and this is still when i was trying
to figure out how relationships worked
so you know like the whole you know oh
you should you should ignore women that
makes them want you like like all those
kind of like
really kind of crappy information that's
out there for when you're young
in trying to somehow cipher wisdom from
all of that
in in some form to interact in
relationship
and so what do you think is useful
to make a relationship so it sounds like
y'all are married now
yes um i i honestly i got lucky
i'm gonna be real honest i like i don't
know how it happened
it's it's like it's like doing that jump
in a video game you do it once and you
have no idea how you did it and you can
never do it again
that that is literally like it's just
everything lined up
i i don't know um but what i will say
as far as it lasting we've been married
for
over we've been together eight years
we've been married six
um communication is so incredibly
important
is if the other if the other person
doesn't know where you're
at they can't work with you
and she didn't know i was autistic when
um we we got married and all that we
didn't find out until years later
and there were points where you know it
looked like we might get divorced but
having a conversation around there and
understanding like yeah this is this
sucks this is problematic we weren't
quite expecting this
but um we got through it
because we we talked we understand she
knows how much i love her how much i
care about her
um i i do what i can to try and
help out even though i struggle in so
many other ways like
being being married to someone who isn't
able to to bring in like full-time work
or isn't able to bring in lots of money
is difficult but
um communication really helps
yeah i'm glad you said that because i
think that's what i'm hearing is
different
um so i i think that you know sometimes
people feel like they don't
they can't bring value to a relationship
and i know you say
frankly it was luck or so therefore it
was rng
and i certainly feel the same way about
my relationship in terms of getting
really really lucky
but i do think that you know there are a
lot of really interesting things kind of
objectively
des about your relationship and how it
evolved and i think there are a lot of
lessons to take away for people
so here's what i'm hearing you you know
this is this is what your character
sheet shows right
so you were born with the autism trait
which is like
comes with like charisma penalties and
and things like that
like it's hard for you to socially
interact with people it can be really
challenging and let me know if this
sounds offensive at some point okay um
and then also that like
some of your disability prevents you
from doing things like working full-time
and things like that and so
on paper you know i think a lot of
people will look at that and will say
like if if people are in your shoes like
i could only imagine
being you know a 24 year old person with
autism who's unable to
hold a full-time job and to think to
myself
that i'm not worthy of having a
relationship i can't ever be in a
relationship
and yet what i'm hearing from you is
that ultimately like you can actually
have a very successful relationship
and that as important and as it's hard
right so there's some amount of shame
and expectation and societal stuff and
whatnot
but at the end of the day that like
communicating with your partner and like
letting people know where you're at
letting people like owning up to what
your shortcomings are and trying to
support them the best that you can that
like
you can talk about things and like let
people know where you're at
and and i think another thing that
you're not really mentioning i'd imagine
you're very good at listening
and also like you know what people
sometimes what
the the trickiest thing that i see in
terms of like marriage counseling i
don't do a whole lot of it
is that a lot of people make sacrifices
and then feel resentful and then their
partner says
i never asked you to make that sacrifice
right so like i'll make a big sacrifice
and then i'll feel owed
because i made this big sacrifice and
then the person on the other side of the
table is like
i never asked that of you and then we
get into this really tricky impasse
because
you know one partner feels really owed
because they've given something up
and then on the other side the other
partner was like i didn't buy that thing
so i don't owe you anything
you know i never asked for that
sacrifice and so what i'm kind of
hearing from you i'm reading between the
lines here is that i think you guys
probably did a really good job
it's not about making the sacrifice or
not making the sacrifice or being able
to be full-time employed or having
autism or not having autism
it's about ultimately being on the same
page about where you guys are whether
it's in a good place or a bad place
and i'm hearing you say that you know
you all have talked about divorce which
sounds like
very understandable because it sounds
like there are a lot of challenges
that you all face in your relationship
just like any other relationship and
that
you guys have an additional layer of
challenge because on some level
you know there are a lot of things that
society expects from you that you may
not be able to do and let me know if
this feels mean
at some point i'm not really i think
it's it actually is like a shining
example
of how so many of what we assume about a
successful relationship
i don't think is actually what makes a
it's not having a particular career it's
not it's like really about being on the
same page and it doesn't it sort of
doesn't matter
like i mean it matters but to me the
most
crucial thing i've seen you know two
neurotypical people who have successful
careers and are very charismatic
who have gotten divorced and i think the
problem is like they're not on the same
page
and i've seen a lot of people who feel
hopeless because of certain
disadvantages they have that they're
unable to find love
or sex but what i'm really hearing from
you is that like
you know that it's possible to have both
of those things as long as you really
focus on
self-awareness attending to another
person's needs
being somewhat transparent about what
your needs are these are the kinds of
things that i i'm really hearing have
led to your success
what do you think uh absolutely i i
think
spending so much time observing studying
being aware of recognizing i i think all
these things have played
an important and critical role in my own
success with relationships
um i mean it's it's like any subject the
more you study it the better you get at
it you might not
um like like i i didn't i didn't just
i wasn't suddenly born with my
understanding of neuroscience i had to
study it i had to go through i had to
take classes
and then you know i was able to actually
start to understand it
and so for a lot of
normal individuals out there they might
have all this understanding already kind
of pre-built in
whereas for for myself i had to study it
and study and study and
i think it paid off yeah
well said yes um so
i had a couple of other like so i i
really appreciate everything you've
shared with us i'd love to hear a little
bit about
aba activism what's going on with with
autism if you want to talk about that
um you know i think there are a couple
of other things that you mentioned which
i think are like really really
important for people to hear like this
concept of love being withheld based on
your behaviors
is there a particular direction you want
to take things yes
um so i'm like this is this is a really
important conversation for the autistic
community
since aba is is generally considered
abuse by our community
um and on the idea of like the old
school aba being a way of withholding
love withholding attention with holding
certain characteristics and why i
compared earlier
like giving myself aba um for for those
asking by what aba is
it's it's basically um
put the simplest way not to to downgrade
what it is or to downgrade ourselves
it's it's pavlovian right whereas like
you give a reward or you give a negative
response to elicit a specific response a
specific behavior
and in the instance where i was talking
earlier about with my uncle
is my uncle would do an action um i
respond negatively to the um
clinking noise of a ball right my
response would be
okay i'm not going to react to that
because i don't want that added
that added pain because they'll keep
clanking the ball
in a nearest response to this annoyance
so that is a negative reinforcement that
tells me not to elicit that behavior
this is similar to what we've seen in a
lot of aba it's changed since then
i've been told um but there's
still a lot of problems especially like
positive reinforcement can still be
problematic if you're getting a behavior
to respond that causes harm
for example i once had
a meltdown not one that resulted in me
hitting myself but i threw my phone and
ended up running into a wall because a
professor touched the lip of my cam
so i had a can um and their their hand
touched the
the part where you drink from which
caused me to become everywhere
very overwhelmed it's something that's
very stressful and
and painful for me but aba would see
this behavior as problematic
and would expose me to it constantly
until i didn't respond
in a negative way
so what what what's
what is the problem you see with that um
uh it elicits pain
as a way of um
no longer performing that behavior
rather than acknowledging the the needs
of the individual and what is going on
i you know ask the person to move the
can
versus moving the can yourself
it it puts the burden on the autistic
to suffer rather than creating a
situation where no one
is suffering that's a good point i'm not
sure if people were
um yeah so so that that's a good point
so
can i share like a similar experience
that i've had sort of
as a treatment professional go ahead so
i was working with uh
a young guy with misophonia so
misophonia is a neurological disorder
where like
something is messed up where so normally
when we hear a sound like you know sound
hits our eardrum
and then that you know the sound travels
via a neuron to our auditory cortex
then travels to our auditory association
cortex
so like i'm able to hear sounds but if i
use
words for example your brain does not
interpret words as sounds it interprets
words
as words so that comes from your
auditory association cortex so something
is
i we don't know exactly what happens in
misophonia but there are some
sounds that elicit like pain like so
instead of
you know like this hearing a particular
sound
is like the experience of like rubbing
you know like this person described it
to me as like
rubbing like an open wound with
sandpaper
and so like literally sounds will hurt
them
and so the interesting thing this is
unfortunately this person is is older
now
and so like back in the day they went to
go see a neurologist
who would essentially do exposure
therapy
and was like focused on like making this
person more resilient
and they're like you know much like
exposure therapy like what we're gonna
do is expose you to the sound
until your neurons acclimatize to it
and so what this person sort of
discovered is that like they didn't
ever acclimatize to it because it's sort
of like you know it doesn't matter how
many times you get
kicked in the nuts like it's gonna hurt
every time there's no like acclimatizing
to getting kicked in the nuts
and so the bizarre thing that the reason
they wound up in my office is they were
so
traumatized by the treatment
that they sort of developed ptsd and a
personality disorder
as a result like chronic ptsd so to see
ptsd personality disorder it sort of
completely changed the way that they
like interacted with like
so like they started to think of like
doctors and parents
like it was really confusing because
they understood oh this doctor is trying
to help me and like my parents are
trying to help me but like
they're hurting me a ton and they won't
stop and they won't stop ever
and they they tell me that every time i
get hurt that like i need to be stronger
and it completely reshaped the way that
they looked at their
like important relationships caused a
ton of problems
and i think the re the way we were able
to make progress is through recognizing
that
you know early on when you were like six
years old
these people who were supposed to
protect you actually would like take you
once a week
and rub sandpaper over your open wounds
and what do you think that does to a
child
when it happens like clockwork once a
week
for an hour for a decade
and and it's really kind of terrifying
that like a lot of times i think
unfortunately as treatment professionals
there's a lot of iatrogenic which means
like you know treatment-induced
injury um and it's really sad
but just uh you know i get what you're
saying
i i didn't i didn't realize this about
aba though so
it's good to know yes there there's been
talks about changes i um recently read
an article that came out in 2021
um and from there like the argument that
aba has changed
it's still argued as unethical because
the practitioners are
are working outside of their scope as
well i.e that they're not
experts on autism in that to treat
a neurological disorder from a
psychological perspective is also
troublesome
because it's it's not
it can't be solely confined by behavior
so
it's kind of outside of the scope of the
individual to not
have experience with autism
um like like to actually be like an
expert on nazism so they can't even
notice
like if the autistic individual is
in pain right because we we don't
display
our our pain we don't display our trauma
in the same way that
neurotypical individuals will so it's
very problematic to say that well
they're not
they're not being hurt it's like anyone
can say that it's like well
they're not being hurt it it doesn't
mean that you can't
all right just because you can't see it
doesn't mean it's not there
yeah i mean don't get me started there
because it's
it's like such an uphill battle to try
to explain to people
who think that they're experts that
they're not experts
like the one lesson that i've come away
with
uh desk like just personally as a
clinician is that i can have all the
training in the world
but every person i meet is an individual
and when i run into trouble is when i
start
when i start thinking about myself as an
expert
and when someone comes to me and says
you don't know what you're talking about
like i've learned how to listen to what
they're saying
no matter where i trained no matter how
much experience i have
because this is the bizarre thing about
medicine is like you know we we
use like these protocols and paradigms
but like literally
every human being is unique and so i
don't know
is a system of medicine why we don't
sort of like
acknowledge or factor that into our
day-to-day
operations but i think it's really hard
to explain to people
who believe themselves to be experts
that
you know you may not know as much as you
think there's a lot of like
professional hubris certainly within
medicine
i think we see it a lot in in especially
unfortunately in mental health
because you'll have a lot of people who
are you know
i i think i i have a bias here so you
know i have to kind of share that but
it's my belief that a lot of our mental
health is actually physical in nature
um there's a lot of evidence of this
nowadays but if you look at like for
example you mentioned the fight or
flight response right that's a
physiologic response
and so i i don't know how much therapy
is gonna help i i mean i think therapy
can help a lot with that kind of stuff
but
i think that therapists if they ignore
the physiologic component of your
your autistic meltdown they're gonna be
doing you a disservice
the challenge is that most therapists
are not trained in physiology
um right and and we see this a lot too
in terms of
of physical medicine as well where
medical doctors
who are not trained in psychology will
like ignore the symptoms of their
patients because they think that they're
psychological
so like everyone's guilty of it you have
medical doctors that are ignoring the
psychological component and you have
psychologists who are ignoring the
physical component
um and and i think that unfortunately
like the problem is like the person who
gets screwed is the patient
um which is sad and and i i've just seen
a lot of professional hubris like
and i don't think it helps people like i
don't think it does right by our
patients
so i don't know what i'm trying to say
there but no
i i i completely understand what you're
what you're getting across
it definitely is a problematic situation
it there was something i actually i
wanted to say on that too that was
really really important oh
no damn it this is this is the problem
with the adhd brain as well we have that
thought
but we didn't write it down so it's just
it's gone well next time just interrupt
i know you've trained see i've been
taught not to interrupt that i know it's
the problem
so i know you've trained yourself not to
but like i think next time interrupt
you know i guess um let me try to run
through the sequence so we were talking
a little bit about
and see if we can catch it again even if
it slipped away so
uh you had talked a little bit about how
aba is still unethical
i shared the story about misophonia how
a lot of times
treatment can actually be like
iatrogenically injuring
that we're trying to help people and we
actually end up hurting them instead
um and then i talked i ranted a little
bit about professional hubris and a big
problem that i see in sort of mental
health treatment which is that
uh you know meant yeah there you go
autonomy
autonomy it's the idea that
those with mental health issues don't
have it
and so that these experts feel
like they have a power of authority
over the individual because they
they're not as seen as having autonomy
it's one of the big issues that we face
as autistics
is that we're emphasized things like the
the puzzle piece puzzle piece and how
all these little different components
it gives people the idea that we can be
spoken over
because we're not capable of speaking
for ourselves
i think it's only approximately 30
percent
of autistics have an intellectual
disability
so there's still a large portion of the
autistic community that is capable
i mean are not even those with
intellectual disabilities they can still
speak from themselves
they might just need more help to be
able to do so
but that 30 is what's seen rather than
the entire autistic community
and it's it's sadly not just us as i was
mentioning it's the entire mental health
as well where you lose that autonomy
as soon as you're seen as having a
disability
a good example is individuals in
wheelchairs
people will go around and push them in
the wheelchair if they're in the way
they'll invade their their space above
their head
like it that that kind of individual
control is gone
i've never heard of the face i mean i
think it makes a lot of sense but i've
never heard the phrase
invade the space above your head their
head
i never think about like when i think
about my personal space i mean i you
know i haven't sat in a wheelchair but
i'm just
appreciating for a moment that generally
speaking when i think about invasions of
my personal space i think about them in
like
horizontal directions i don't really
think about in a vertical direction i i
i don't mean i mean i'm laughing just
because i don't know what else to do
right now but
i it's bizarre like i i can't imagine
what it's like to
you know have to worry about that space
and i feel lucky to not have to worry
about that space but it's it's
it's crazy um yeah i'm with you in terms
of autonomy though and i think this is
the the other tricky thing
yeah so that's why i was kind of curious
about you know this term disabled
because
i see this a lot too and i think
sometimes
yeah it's tough because i think we're
quick
to take away other people's autonomy
um i see this a lot too where a lot of
times we like i see this with with
our community actually and like when
they talk to their parents
so we work on this a lot where people
will say
you don't understand right so like the
parents will say to the kid like you
don't understand
like i wish like let me explain it to
you and it's like no like
i'm allowed to understand and disagree
it's not that i don't understand like
you're you're kind of assuming that i'm
ignorant whereas i just
disagree i'm allowed to have an opinion
that is different from yours and that
doesn't make it objectively wrong it's
not a deficiency in my understanding
i see this a lot also in gender dynamics
um in terms of like sometimes you know
people will
like especially towards women and within
our community
um you know people will be like oh
because you are a woman therefore your
opinion is worth less than someone
else's
like you need to understand or actually
i don't even know that it's even that
conscious but like i i see this a lot
where
where disagreements are viewed as like a
lack of understanding
anytime there's kind of like this power
dynamic whether it's parents and kids or
men and women or whatever have you had
personal experiences where you felt like
you've been kind of shouted down or
ignored because of your disability
i want to say yes but i'm not able to
pull anything right out of the top of my
head
totally fine man okay um i know i've had
to argue a lot with like psychiatrists
and everything as well
just in general um things like
medication it's one of the reasons why i
pursued
pharmaceutical sciences and stuff
because i wanted to have a bit more
control over my own medication since
like when it comes to like the
pharmaceutical side
it's very it's not patient tailored
because we're not going into like
genetics etc etc
so finding those right mediums were very
difficult and so i wanted to have some
sort of authority in that conversation
to be able to better treat myself versus
where it's just
no i'm i know better
yeah that really pisses me off like i i
think that i i recently had a
conversation with a patient of mine
where you know
it was a tough it was a tough sort of
impasse um
because i was sort of recommending a
particular medication that they didn't
like and then ultimately like
you know at some point in the
conversation i was like i'm not the one
it's easy for me to make this
recommendation because i'm not the one
who has to put that pill into my body on
a daily basis
you know and i think that's very easy to
forget like we sort of think about
um you know what's like evidence-based
and scientific but like
as is pharmacologic prescribers like
we're not the one who has to
you know i have this book right and the
book has a list of side effects and i'm
like it can cause dry mouth it can cause
weight gain
it can cause erectile dysfunction but
like i'm not the one who has to live
with it right
it's the patient who has to live with it
and that's what makes it really really
challenging i think
oftentimes as prescribers like it's one
of the things that i try really hard to
remember
it's something that i don't think we
emphasize enough but i don't think that
you should
need to get formal training to be
informed about medications i think
actually that's your right as a patient
and it's the responsibility of your
doctors to equip you with the
information to make an informed choice
as opposed to overrule what you want to
based on their authority like do they
know about it more than you do
absolutely but it's their job informed
consent
is like not about the consent it's about
the informed
absolutely um i i do actually have an
example as well
i went to uh my friend's wedding
and i had gotten lost um i was
in the actual wedding venue but i guess
i wasn't supposed to be there yet
and i i told like this person came
through and said like hey you're not
supposed to be here like he was like
getting really aggressive with me
and so you know i i went in and opened
up immediately hey i'm autistic
i'm confused i don't know where i'm
supposed to be and his response
immediately
was to see me as a child he directly put
his hands on me
it was like they're there bud like
literally all of my autonomy in that
instance was ripped from me
rather than being like hey i might have
some trouble
interacting this conversation i just
need a little bit
help like it was completely ripped from
me and just
like like my personal space was invaded
my
intellectual capability was invalidated
it sucked like like i i don't want to
call it dramatic
but at the same time it
it felt
disgraceful
you're good with words yes
i i paid a lot i had to pay a lot of
attention to words growing up
um like there was times where like i i
think i spent
days studying to understand metaphor
similes stuff like that just because
i wanted to have greater communication
capability
yeah i think you do a very good job i
think you're you know we talk about
alexa thymia sometimes on stream
i'd be really curious about how you
learned how to put
words to what you feel because i even
saw like the gears turning in your mind
there where you were like recalling the
experience and trying to figure out
what is the right word to describe how i
felt
um and and it was yeah you're good with
words man it's cool it's it's it it's
it's a pleasure to hear you talk about
stuff
because i think i'm happy to hear that
yeah you you're like
you're skilled with your words like in
terms of the way that you paint
and you can paint a very clear picture
because your words are quite precise
um do you want to talk about color on
the spec color
i'm sorry did you ever respond i mean i
didn't mean to shift gears on either
but so color the spectrum is event that
is happening april 30th that is
really problematic for the those of us
on the autistic spectrum
um it's done by mock robber and i'm sure
it's it's done with good intention
uh some of the language used one of the
like problematic things are things like
my son will never be able to become an
astronaut
where there's a lot of this like a lot
of autistics
and a lot of parents are hit with this
immediately as soon as their child's
diagnosed with autism
your son will never be able to do this
your your daughter will never be able to
become this
right there's a lot of um
a lot of i can't think of the word
there's a lot of qualifiers placed on
what a person can and can't be as soon
as they have a disability
and i this language is really harmful to
the autistic community
um we were kind of as mentioned
emphatized where we're seen as children
a lot of everything going on is from the
perspective of parent to child
rather than adult to adult or
adult to child right i think that the an
adult to a child that communication is
different than a parent to a child
um and next for autism is the charity
that's being supported
up until recently they wanted to cure
and prevent
autism which many of us in the autistic
community feel
is very um
they they use eugenics um i i think
that's a very
very powerful term um
i i see it as saying you don't want me
to exist
that autistics shouldn't exist
because we're seen as problematic um of
course next raw autism
came out with a whole thing like oh we
never
said that this is this is just gross
misinformation
and then they silently remove their
their mission statement that actually
include cure autism etc
and just didn't talk about it so they
they basically
gaslit the entire autistic community
and just like oh don't listen to them
and sorry go ahead can can i can i play
devil's advocate for a second because
now actually i'm a little bit confused
devil's advocate means i'm supporting a
point but it's really
i'm confused so when i as a medical
professional
when i think about a disability i do
certainly have a bias like for example
when someone
you know loses a let or i i maybe that
has to do with losing
um i tend to think about restoration of
function
is an important part of my profession
and so when i think about someone with
like a physical disability like if
someone had lost a hand
like i would think that it is a good
move
to for that person to no longer be
disabled
um when i think about you know like i'll
write letters for like medical
disabilities for people with depression
i certainly i mean i personally like
have a goal as a treatment provider
to get that person to no longer be
disabled
so now i'm a little bit confused about
um and apologies if i'm you know coming
across as
like not understanding because i i'm
really confused now because when i
when when you use the word disability i
think about something
as i that word triggers in me the idea
that something neat could or eventually
should be fixed
what do you think about that
i acknowledge that
my the it is a disability it does limit
what i can do what i can accomplish
but i think it's a disservice to also
what it allows for us to do and for what
it allows for us to accomplish
right it's important to acknowledge is
autism a disability because it's a
disability
or is it a disability because of society
and understanding how our ability to
function
in society makes it a disability
that's right there's there's a lot of
that argument where
it might not be something that needs to
be cured or prevented
because rather it should be about
meeting us
and understanding what we are or what
we're dealing with
rather than be like you don't fit let's
fix you because that
that yeah that's super problematic very
well said so i'm i'm gonna kind of just
riff off that for a second and talk
about adhd so a lot of times when i work
with people with adhd
also as a clinician i try really really
hard
to not take the kid and make him
successful
don't default to making him successful
at sitting in a classroom for eight
hours a day
so so my treatment if you can call it
that for adhd
is to try to structure an environment
where there are vata mines so they have
a mind that's far more dynamic
can handle a lot more varied stimuli and
is not really suited to like staring at
a book for four hours a day
so what i actually try to do with my
patients with adhd is not to turn them
into
people who can read books but to help
them structure an environment because i
think that adhd
is actually like more of a natural i
mean there's definitely a clinical
illness in there
but i think there are too many people
who get diagnosed with adhd
because their minds are not suited for a
particular
environment like school so there's a
really interesting bit of research that
shows that
as the student-to-teacher ratio gets
worse
more kids get diagnosed with adhd so if
you have one teacher in 10 students
very few diagnoses of adhd if you have
one teacher and 50 students like half
the class is going to get diagnosed with
adhd
so i can totally get behind that did you
want to say
actually i actually wish i had that kind
of treatment growing up
i for me the only place i can actually
study is in a classroom now
so i need like this this very specific
environment anywhere else i can't study
yeah it sucks yeah i think it's it's
also an interesting philosophical
question about
you know how much do we change who we
are versus how much do we
adapt or shape our environment to
accommodate us
i'm curious and let me know if this
question rubs you the wrong way if i
could give you a pill and
and that would quote unquote cure your
autism would you take it
it's one of those hard things right it's
like it can't
i can't quantify what part of me is
autistic
right that that's one of the big things
in like why we we tend to prefer
autistic individual versus individual
with autism
is because we can't really separate that
we can't be like oh that's that's my
autism part okay
bye i don't like you it it's it's so
much of who i am
and so to secure my autism would mean
eliminating who i am and so
like i i i couldn't like ethically
not just like not just because of like
the other reason so even ethically i
would be
deleting a part of myself
interesting so uh can i
disagree with you a little bit yeah sure
you're more than welcome to disagree all
right so
all respect but so this is where like i
tend to be in the minority and i realize
what i'm about to say like may offend
like millions of people
but you know it's weird uh yes like
because it's hard because what are you
right like i can understand exactly
where you're coming from but
the more i've meditated so a lot of what
i'm saying comes from my experiences in
meditation
where i've come to realize that core
parts of my identity is not truly who i
am
so i i would potentially for example
identify as a doctor and i clearly do
and there's a part of me that feels like
if you took my medical license away
i would not be me but oddly enough the
more i've meditated the more i've come
to realize that even being a doctor is a
false part of who i am
that the truest part of who i am is
somewhat transcendent and cannot be
reduced to a particular quality
i know it sounds weird but like like i i
don't think of myself so it's it's kind
of bizarre so i work with a fair number
of people who are transgender too
and and you know my approach to them is
i can't tell if this is like
really really offensive or really really
accepting
but that their basic humanity is like
makes the core of who they are
and that that transcendent humanity is
far
more important than what their
[Music]
gender is and some people get really
offended by this and we have
that conversation and other people
really appreciate it i'm not sure what's
right or wrong it's just been
my experience in terms of discovering
who i am
because there's a part yeah sorry i
don't think i
follow doesn't that fit my statement
because you said that it may sorry yeah
so so that that's what's also kind of
confusing i think it's a different way
of looking at identity
but like i there's a part of me that
says that we could change a lot of
things about you and you would still be
you
but what i'm hearing you say is that you
consider
your identity to be entangled with
autism
and so removing the autism is removing a
piece of you
right like philosophically and somewhat
neuron scientifically
speaking like our our consciousness is
our brain right we could argue that the
structure of our brain plays a large
role
in our consciousness with autism being a
neurological disorder
the way that my brain is shaped is
shaped so by my autism
so to change that neurological component
would be to change myself
yeah so then my next question is is
changing yourself a bad thing
there is a difference between changing
yourself and neuroplasticity and
choosing key components of your identity
um and in that i i can't think of a good
example right now
there there's superficial change that we
all have that to some degree i think
can be critical um but
at the the identity of it all it's the
same i think
maybe this is a good example of phineas
phineas gage
uh for those who don't know phineas gage
had a
rod he was a railway railroad worker he
had a rod go through
his um his job basically i can't think
of the specific
um and went through the frontal cortex
which caused his entire behavior to
change
um so he started gambling he went from
like this religious devout person to
a gambling alcoholic very aggressive
very
um just
very horrible person so to speak by
comparison not saying that that is
horrible but
um was he still phineas gage
right and like that that's the whole
theory of like mind and what is and
isn't i don't think i'm equipped to
really have that that conversation
but to my understanding is that i cease
to exist when that changes
yeah so this is where things get a
little bit tricky because i
i you know it's it's interesting um yes
because i
i get exactly where you're coming from
and i think autonomy is ultimately like
what is most important so i think you
get to decide whether you like who you
are and whether you want to change i do
think it's arrogant for an organization
or for someone else like
including myself as a you know potential
treatment provider
for me to decide what is right for my
autistic patients like i don't get to
make that decision you get to make that
decision
and and so i can get i can totally
support you 100
in terms of you know you saying that
autism has shaped the person that i
am and i would it's i didn't hear you
say yes or no if i offered you the pill
no no okay so i think that's totally
fine i think that's
that's ultimately i think autonomy is
tends to be the
the ethical principle that is a
treatment provider like i try to value
above everything else
um at the same time i also find that i'm
in the profession
of trying to make people change that a
lot of times people will come to me
because there is a part of what they
view as their core identity which they
do not like in which they want to change
and i think that's totally fine too i
know personally that
um a lot of my journey has been
struggling
to get away from my identity and
discover who i truly am
because i think a lot of our identity is
like crafted and given to us
right like you're right like the
identity that society gives you when you
when you're at that wedding and you say
to this person that i have autism and
i'm confused i'm not sure where i'm
supposed to be
the way that the world treats you the
way that the identity that like
the world kind of hands you is one that
i think sometimes we have to actually
try really hard to get away from because
i think we also
internalize some of that so it's not
just uh you can arguably say yeah
society's like society's wrong but i
think what we do is we internalize these
things right
when we think about shame and stuff like
that we start to believe that we
are you know when it comes to the chads
and the what chads and the betas is it
chad and beta is that the
what's the opposition
anyway i i don't know so
it's tricky but i'm i'm i'm really happy
that you
you answer the question i i feel like i
learned a lot and i i think you've
really helped me
understand you said not people without
because that's interesting because i've
been told the opposite that it's more
offensive
that you define a person by a particular
diagnosis
that's the thing right like like as i
was mentioning since
autism is a neurological disability we
are as much autistic as we are a person
we're an autistic
person right our our identity can't be
separated i can't just like
okay i'm gonna go ahead and take my
autistic self i'm gonna just leave it at
home
and i'm gonna be totally normal today i
never can separate that
so i was taught the opposite by a
different group of people with a
different diagnosis
so and i'm not saying one is right or
wrong but like just to share with you
like
another conversation i had i was talking
with people with schizophrenia
and in medicine we have some
diseases that we define as the person
so we'll say so and so is a
schizophrenic
right but there is no noun that involves
cancer
so cancer is an illness like you're not
defined by your cancer like you get
diagnosed with a cancer i have
a cancer i'm not like a cancer rick
and so people like when i was kind of
like talking to people with
schizophrenia what they were sort of
saying to me
is that they don't appreciate
being defined by a particular illness or
aspect of themselves
and that they think that the person is
more important with schizophrenia
because there's still a person and the
problem is that once you get labeled as
a schizophrenic you become a
schizophrenic
you become a and i guess what they would
say is you
become an autistic in the eyes of others
but that your humanness is more
important than your autism but i
understand both sides of the argument i
don't know
i i think when it comes to schizophrenic
it has a lot to do with the stigma
as we mentioned at the start of this the
individual with borderline personality
disorder
these things have such negative
connotations to them
that you naturally don't want to be
associated to that you want to be seen
as a person because what society sees
when they
hear these words are untouchable someone
that
just to avoid um
thankfully that hasn't happened with
autism yet
okay and so i think we have the ability
to take that word and make it a positive
rather than trying to distance ourselves
from negative connotations
um and so do you consider like if i were
to
so you refer to yourself as an autistic
individual
is that your preferred and and
uh is the term
uh is there a noun form of person with
autism is it
an autistic yes an autistic as an
autistic
okay um so so it the then the term
autistic is not offensive to you
no okay got it thanks for clarifying
cool
uh again i can only really speak for
myself and
other autistics that i've interacted
with um obviously there's going to be
people of a community
that might feel otherwise i i think i
saw a comment it's up to the individual
and i think that's important as well to
consider is that some individuals will
prefer to be referred to as
individuals with autism some will be
referred to as autistic
individual and i think both should be
honored based on the
the individual person yeah
cool anything else that you want to tell
us or explain to us about you know
what's going on in the autistic
community or
anything that you want to raise
awareness of um
i'm currently doing a charity event for
autistic self-advocacy network uh we've
raised sixteen thousand eight hundred
and forty dollars so far
this month this is my third year uh
running warriors for autism
uh in world of warcraft i eventually
would like to start my own charity
focusing on helping autistic adults
i want to focus on you know
things like housing and employment
and kind of like creating this this
community that
is self-sustaining but in the meantime
one of the most important things is i
think self-advocacy equipping autistics
to be able to
advocate for ourselves to illustrate
what autism
is so that the the broader population
can understand who we are is incredibly
important
and it's one of the reasons why i've
been really really proud to support asan
for
these past three years awesome can i ask
one clarifying question sorry about the
terminology yeah go ahead is the term
autist
hopefully that's not a bannable term but
do you know
but is that offensive or is that okay
i'm not a big fan of autist uh i
i don't know about others like i i can't
speak on that one with any authority
um but i know that autist has a bit more
sling to it
in that it has negative connotations
kind of similar to
um sperg a lot of people don't know that
spur comes from asperger's
and that a lot of the characteristics
that use or
are associated to sperg are the negative
characteristics that you associate to
autism
okay thanks for clarifying yeah i i sort
of am
more familiar with that term in terms of
like i do find it to be a little bit
more derogatory and stigma inducing
um i basically don't see it used outside
of 4chan
which i think by definition makes it a
little bit
less safer yeah exactly
oh so but thanks for clarifying to us i
appreciate that
of course um any so sometimes i'll teach
people how to meditate on stream is that
interesting to you i actually used to
meditate a lot when i was younger
um i got harassed a lot for that
like one time when i was in a after
school
care thing i would be meditating and
not even joking one of the employees
there
uh took their drink and threw it in my
face
that's crazy man yeah um
i wish i have so many stories like this
childhood was rough but yeah um so
meditating yes i haven't done in many
many
many years but um i used to quite
regularly
um okay so i i can teach you like a
relatively introductory technique which
we do frequently on stream
um maybe we can all do it together but
it's a good technique because it
actually
increases your sympathetic let me think
about this
so there's one that balances your
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous
system
and there's another one that um
[Music]
are you just suppressing yawn
no okay i i just felt like i got a
yawning signal from you but
um i i just took a deep breath just like
like getting prepared to meditate
sorry
i was like oh he's trying not to yawn to
to to be polite
and he's been programmed so
oh no no oh my god i um
i was taking physics
a calculus based physics and it was lit
at night
and i totally forgot where i was and i
just let out this big
[Music]
while the teacher was talking
yeah um i have something to show you
real quick
uh so i can give you two options for a
technique
one is one that balances your
sympathetic and parasympathetic nervous
system
and another one actually activates your
parasympathetic nervous system
more directly uh this is not what i was
looking for but i think it's interesting
um so there's some evidence that
people with who are tests high on
sociopathy
don't actually um
uh people who test high on on the
sociopathy scale
actually don't uh
um they don't uh
yawn the same way
so like if contagious yawning is less
common
in people who are sociopaths so if you
guys
are for those of you on twitch chat who
are yawning with us
you are less likely to be a sociopath
and for those of you
who are not yawning you're more likely
to be a sociopath
um i
this is not the paper i was looking for
but i i grabbed it anyway just because i
think it's interesting because this one
talks about
autism versus psychopathic traits i've
never seen a paper that compares the two
but i'll have to look at this i can send
this to you if you want yeah
i'd actually really like that yeah that
was actually one of the hardest things i
found about my master's program was
reading papers
oh god i hate paper so much i think
that's the adhd part though
annaletti i don't know her but okay
interesting
um so in terms of uh
meditation you want you know we can do
something that is
um
[Music]
what you may call um we can do something
that's
parasympathetic and sympathetic or
something that it really recruits the
parasympathetic nervous system
more directly
uh let's try the parasympathetic more
directly okay
so i'm gonna teach you um a technique
called
bellows breath actually let me think
about let's teach you something new
um so i'm going to teach you
um hold on
yeah okay i'm gonna i'm gonna teach you
a technique called bellows breath
or no that's not the translation
um i'm gonna teach you
i forget what the sense with word is but
i'm going to teach you yeah let's just
call bella's breath
it's technically not correct but so what
i'm going to do is do a series of rapid
forceful exhalations followed by
a passive inhalation it's kind of hard
to describe it you'll you'll understand
i think hopefully when i
show you so we're going to breathe very
rapidly
focusing on the exhalation and then
what's going to happen is our co2 level
is going to drop really low
and so as our co2 as we become
hypocarbic
our respiratory drive is going to
compensate by
slowing down our breathing
and so as we slow down our breathing
it's gonna be like really really
natural and then we'll sort of be in
this like chill state afterward
okay so what i'm gonna do i'll just
demonstrate so we're gonna start with
like i'll do nine breaths
and i'm gonna blow out x forcefully
through the nose
nine times and um
it sounds kind of weird but i'm not
gonna focus on inhaling i'm just gonna
try to push out air
over and over and over again and then
after nine breaths i'm gonna just be
silent okay
so ready
hold on i need kleenex
the snot came out okay here we go
did you get that so nine forceful
exhalations
okay okay so i'm gonna try this let's
i'm gonna watch you do it okay
okay breathe out hard nine times and
then just chill after
okay
good so second time around we're gonna
do
let's do 15 with our eyes closed
okay so take it deep so close your eyes
take a deep breath in
and begin
all right let's do 20 now
how do you feel after the 15 breaths
confused mostly okay so let's try 20.
am i supposed to breathe in directly
after the 15 or do i hold my breath
there for a bit because
i have your breath okay just do whatever
feels natural because holding my breath
is what felt natural
because like i just didn't want to
breathe yep yep that's the point
so but don't try to hold your breath
right so i i told you there's going to
be a natural
slowing of your respiratory rate because
you're hypocarbic
so your your your your mind will st like
you'll feel like not breathing and then
as you
don't breathe it'll actually like
recruit
your vagal systems okay
right so rapid breathing is associated
with this sympathetic nervous system
activity
increased respiratory rate so what we're
doing is recruiting
naturally our vagal system okay
okay so let's do 20 breaths
ready take a deep breath in go
so we're just gonna sit in this space
for about 60 seconds
this
when you're ready go ahead and come on
back
how you feeling it feels very similar to
like a hot shower
or a hot tub or relaxing on the couch
with a loved one
interesting relaxing on the couch with a
loved one meditation
well yeah like like there's these times
where like you just find a really good
show it's not like super
like exciting but you just feel so at
peace with your
your loved one that you just kind of
like melt into the couch
you don't really know how to so that's
what we call
parasympathetic activation right that's
a beautiful way to describe it actually
is like you know you're kind of
recruiting your floatiness
your chillingness and um
you know i'd be a little bit careful
desk like i'd experiment a little bit on
your own
um maybe if you have a clinician
involved uh you know just touch base
with them but my hope would be that if
you're ramping up towards like
an autistic meltdown you may be able to
use this to recruit some of that floaty
sensation
you just got to be a little bit careful
that that initial hyperventilation phase
doesn't actually make things worse
chances are
i use this technique um for people with
who have panic attacks
and if they can do it kind of early
enough they can sort of stave off the
panic attack
and a lot of times even in the middle of
a panic attack it can be helpful
and they always tell me when i when i do
it with someone who's acutely in a panic
attack like in the emergency room
they say it doesn't help but then a week
later they're like yeah that actually
helped a lot
i just didn't realize it at the time
so i i didn't use this metaphor earlier
but i think it's a good example to
describe kind of
the the difference between neurotypical
response and autistic response
it's like we have this this water
balloon right
and so the water balloon can hold so
much water
um and eventually if too much water gets
in it it bursts
right i feel like normal individuals
have valves towards the bottom of it so
it takes a lot of water
and a lot of like miss mis fortunate
circumstances for it to actually fill
enough to burst
um so eventually like as water comes in
water goes out
for those of us with autism or at least
for myself specifically the way i would
describe it
is we have a much smaller balloon and
the valves are at the very top
so as it fills with water um
it takes longer for water to come back
out so it fills up at a much more rapid
rate
than the the water like going out
um so we're more likely to hit that
burst point
before we realize that we're full
so it's really hard and requires a lot
of
um cognition of like there's water in
here
i need to to start prepping and
preparing myself
before it even reaches those valves
well said beautiful analogy dust so
thanks a lot um for coming on you know
we really appreciate you coming on
sharing your perspectives about you know
what it's like to kind of grow up with
autism
i think you did a really awesome job of
um
showcasing kind of what the experience
is on the
inside for someone with autism in terms
of like
you know not being able to really
understand why things were hard for you
which i think is a really really good
example
i hear that the most from people not
with anxiety or depression but people
with autism and adhd
i don't understand why this is hard for
me when it seems so easy for everyone
else
um yeah yeah sorry no
go for it oh no no i was just going to
agree with you
yeah i think it's a beautiful way to
describe
you know because a lot of times people
aren't going to know like
like people who may wonder if they're
autistic i think this is a really key
takeaway
for them is that if if things just seem
really really hard for you and like they
seem so much easier for other people
there may be something going on like
autism or adhd
exactly so i think that's actually like
a really beautiful way to put it so
thanks very much for coming on
um thank you for all the work that you
do i think it's awesome that you're
doing it
and um yeah man
thank you thank you so much for having
me this has
been really exciting and this i was so
nervous about today i'm not gonna i was
so nervous
but this was actually really great
i really hope that the my story and
everything's helped connected with
others and i mean one of my favorite
things is people hearing this the story
and realizing like hey maybe i'm
autistic
you know and they they start looking
into it they start pursuing it and they
might finally have answers to
why life's been so hard and not only
that but to have that connection
and to finally feel that sense of
belonging
um yeah so
thanks a lot man i'm struggling to not
make an uh make a joke about how much of
a chad you are
like you guys can find des at twitch.tv
slash
des the autistic chad
uh but it's desmophisto right
yes that's methus though so check out
des on on twitch
and good luck man yes thank you
thank you
that's great okay who are we rating chat